It costs more to have a highly available platform.
You pass this cost through to your customers.
Your customers likely don't use your platform 24 hours a day, every day.
What should we do then? Scheduled maintenance.
This can be a win-win.
Do your customers care if your platform is up at 3:00 AM on a Saturday morning?
They may, or depending on what service your platform offers, they may not.
If you and your customers can agree on certain times
of day or certain times of day on certain days,
then you can build in scheduled maintenance.
You can pass on some of that cost savings then to your customers.
Scheduled maintenance is basically a free pass on downtime.
If you agree that your platform can be down every
Sunday from 1:00 AM to 3:00 AM in a certain time zone,
then you have a time where you can take care of necessary changes to your platform.
This gives you the ability to more easily be up and running during normal business hours.
Thus, you can build
a less complex and less costly system that meets your customers needs.
Do your customers need every aspect of your system
up and running perfectly to get value from your platform?
It is possible that there are aspects that are not really required but are nice to haves.
If so, you can exclude these items from your SLA and make your up time task a bit easier.
Force majeure, force of nature or act of God are terms used to describe
things that are beyond anyone's control or beyond any reasonable level of control.
This term is almost always included in a contract
as coverage for extraordinary circumstances.
As we can see, downtime is not so simple.
Given all that we've talked about,
how do we determine downtime?
Always put serious thought and consideration into measuring
your downtime and think about needs like maintenance windows.
Make sure that you know how to calculate
your downtime before a customer ask the question.
Make sure that the calculation is in writing,
includes all exclusions, and is referenced in any contracts that you have in place.